
*-Editor test script

The purpose of this document is to describe a basic runthrough 
of all aspects of the editor system.  

Bring up a weblistner and load the nostoc organism.  
mds -- check this
Bring up a VPL by going through the login procedure again.
Other-commands --> internal --> Edit-object
In the 'obj' box, type 'npun'
Execute the edit-object box.

Testing the frame editor:

The page should have a bar across with top saying: 
  Data Frame Nostoc_Punctiforme_Atcc29133

Roll your mouse over 'Annotation-Sources', the text should turn change color

Roll over the word 'terrestrial', the vaue of the 'habitat' slot.
A popup should appear saying 'An eleven character string'

Roll over the value of the 'description-html' slot, a large
popup box should appear with some text

Roll over the value of the 'genes' slot, the text should underline
and a popup with the list's length should appear

Click the link, which looks like a list of genes.
The sequence editor will appear...click on the first element, Npun.Npf0001

Roll your mouse over the ':F', the value of the 'direction' slot.
The text should change color and a popup should appear saying 'A keyword symbol'

Roll your mouse over the value of the Organism slot, a popup should appear
saying how many slots are in the data frame

Roll your mouse over '1546', the value of the 'to' slot.  A popup
should appear with the number in hex and binary.  Any letters in the
hex value should be uppercase.  

Click the value of the 'organism' slot, a link back to the npun frame. 

Click the + to the left of the 'Isa' slot.  You should go to the Isa frame.   

mds -- there's no back button in chrome.
Go back in your browser (to npun's frame)

Click on the word "Version", one of npun's slots.  
A box should open up in the bottom of the screen 
with "Version" in the top left 

In the box, erase the text with the the dates and simply type 'foo'
Click the enter button above the textarea, the box should go away and
the value of the 'version' slot should change to foo

Roll your mouse over 'foo', the value of the 'version' slot, verify
it is a string

Click on the word version again, leave the text in the box the same, but click 
the bubble to the right of 'Form' in the top right of the box
Click Enter

Verify that 'foo' is now in all caps, roll your mouse over the text and 
a large popup box should appear with its package and property list.  

mds -- say to change it back

In the 'Add a slot' box, type 'bar', and click 'Add'
A box should open at the bottom, and you should see 'bar' appear
as one of npun's slots, with a value of '-' (which represents NIL).

Type 3 into the text area of the edit box at the bottom
of the page, and hit enter.  The bar slot's value should change to 3.  

mds -- this doesnt work
Type 'bar' into the 'add a slot' box again and click the 'add' button,
the box should pop up with 3 already in the text area.

Hit cancel.  The bottom box should disappear and none of the slots or values
should change.  


Sequence editor

Go back to the weblistener, and execute the following:

(setq de::testlist (utils::iota 1000))
Then go the VPL and bring down another edit-object box, type in 'de::testlist'
and execute the box.  

The sequence editor will appear.  

In the top left, roll your mouse over the words 'start' and 'prev'...
nothing should happen and they should not be clickable.  Roll your mouse
over 'next' and 'end', the text should underline.  

Click next.  'start' and 'prev' should change to blue. 
mds -- these numbers are wrong...here have to specify which mode
You should now be viewing elements 121 through 240.  
Click end.  You should be viewing elements 881 through 1000.

Click Prev.  You should now be viewing elements 761 through 880.

Go to the 'start' box, and type in 500.  Click 'Display'
The elements visible should now start at 500 and go to 619.

Type '100' in the 'show...# of items' box and click 'Display'.
The number of elements visible should go from 500 to 599.  

Type 5 in the '# of columns' box and click 'display', you should 
still be viewing items 500-599, but now in 5 columns.  
Click Prev.  
You should now be viewing elements 400-499 in 5 columns.  

Click on element '400' (click on the green text that says 400).
A box should appear on the bottom of the screen.  
Erase the text, type "foo", and click enter.  
The value of element 400 should change to the symbol FOO.  
Click on '400' again, leave the text in the textarea, but
click on 'String' in the interpret bubble.  The value of element
400 should change to the string FOO, which you can verify by mousing
over the text.  

Go back to the weblistener and type 

(setq de::testvec (coerce de::testlist 'vector))

Then go back to the VPL and type de::testvec into an edit-object box and 
execute it.  

The sequence-editor should appear.  
The title should say "A Vector of 1000 elements"

mds -- again these numbers are wrong
Click end. You should see elements 881 through 1000.  

Type '200' into the start box, '100' into the 'show...items' box, 
and '5' into the 'number of columns' box.  Click Display.
The screen should display elements 200 through 299 displayed in 5 columns.  

In the weblistener, type  
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) (find-package :bio))
and click Start in the top left of the sequence editor.  

Roll your mouse over #<The Biolisp Package>
A large popup box should appear with information about the package.  

;;; investigate why its possible to have no horizontal scroll bar but the
;;; #<the biolisp package> can be stacked in 2 lines

In the weblistener, type
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) (utils::make-garray '(2 2)))
and refresh the sequence editor
Roll your mouse over the first element in the vector,
a large popup should appear with information on the table.  

In the weblistener, type
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) nil)
and refresh the sequence editor.  
The value of the first element should simply be '-'
When you roll your mouse over it, the dash should change color.

In the weblistener, type
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) #C(1 2))
and refresh the sequence editor.  
The value of the first element should be #C(1 2).
Roll your mouse over it...the text should change color and
a popup should appear saying 'A complex number'


In the weblistener, type
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) 1.0d0)
and refresh the sequence editor.  
The value of the first element should be 1.0d0.  
Roll your mouse over it...the text should change color.  

In the weblistener, type
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) 23/2)
Refresh the sequence editor.  
The value of the first
element should change to 23/2, and when you roll
your mouse over it, it should change color and a small
popup should appear with the decimal approximation.  

In the weblistener, type
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) (make-hash-table))
and refresh the sequence editor.  
Roll your mouse over the first element, a popup should appear
saying 'an empty (no keys or values) hash table using EQL'

Click on the 1.  In the text area, type 
#(1 2 3) and press enter.  Roll your mouse over the new value, 
a popup box should appear saying 'a vector of length 3

mds -- are we using zero-based or one-based?

Like before, click on the 1.  In the text area, erase
the text and type ')(' without the quotes.
That is, type a right parenthesis and then a left parenthesis.
Click the Enter button.    

The value of the first element should change to 
be a string beginning with '*** Invalid'
Roll your mouse over this text...a large popup box should appear
with an error message.  
Click the 1 again.  
Erase the text in the textarea and type 3.  
Click the Enter button.  The value of the first element
should change to 3.  

Close the sequence editor window. 
In the weblistener, type
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) (utils::make-garray '(5) :initial-element 10))
Go back to the VPL, and again execute the EDIT-OBJECT box with de::testvec


In the weblistener, type
(setf (ref de::testvec 1) (utils::make-garray '(5) :initial-element 10))
and refresh the sequence editor.  The value of the first element of de::testvec
should say <Table 1d (Numeric)>  Roll your mouse over the link, and 
a large popup should appear.  Now, click this link.  

The title at the top should say 'A 1d Table of 5 elements'

In the 'start' box at the top, type 2.  
In the 'show...items' box at the top, type 2.  
In the '# of columns' box at the top, type 1.  
Click the display button.  

Elements 2 and 3 should now appear in a single column.  Click
on the number 2.  In the textarea, erase the 10 and type 11.
Click the enter button.  The value of the element 2 should change to 11.  

Click 'Start' at the top left.  
You should now see elements 0 and 1, each with a value of 10.  
In the '# of columns' box, type 80, and click Display.  
You should now see elements 0 and 1 in 2 columns.  

Close the sequence editor window.  

Object editor: 

In the weblistener, type:
(setq de::x (bbi::make-labeled-sequence :label "abc" :sequence '(1 2 3)))

Go the VPL and bring down an EDIT-OBJECT box, and type in de::x
Execute the box.  

The object editor should appear.  The title at the top should say:
Object of type Labeled-Sequence

mds -- this errors out!
Click the word 'label'.  In the textarea, erase 'abc' and type 'def'
Click the enter button...the value of the label should change.  
Roll over (1 2 3), the value of the sequence slot, a popup should appear saying
'a list of length 3'
Click the word 'sequence'.  In the textarea, erase (1 2 3) and type 
'abcdef' without the quotes.  Now click the the bubble to the right of 'String'
in the upper right of the edit box.  
The value of the sequence should change.  Roll over the newly-shown abcdef...
the text should change color and a popup should appear 
saying 'a six character string'

Close the object editor window

Go to the weblistener and execute:
(setf (#^version npun) #$testframe)

Go the VPL and bring down an edit-object box and type in npun...
execute the box.  
Click the value of the version slot, Testframe


whats going on here?
Click the value of the Det slot, #<DE-TEST> 
The top of the screen should say 
CLOS Object of type De-Test

You should see:
A: 5
B: 6

Click the B...the edit box will appear on the bottom of the screen.  Erase
the 6 and type in "abcdef", then click the bubble to the right of 'String' 
The value of the B slot should change.  

Close the object editor window.  

Array editor:

In the weblistener, type:

(lisp)

then 

(bio::cl "biol:data-editor;de-tests.lisp")

Now type:

mds  -- this fails

(de::set-up-test-objects)

This will take some time to execute.  

Go back to the VPL.  In an EDIT-OBJECT box, 
enter de::testvec and execute the box.  The sequence editor will appear.  
Click on the number '1'.  The edit box will open on the bottom of the screen.  
In the textarea, erase the text and type #$testframe, 
and make sure the bubble to right of 'Form' is chosen.  
Click the Enter button.  

The value of the first element of the vector should now say Testframe.
Click it.  
	
There should only be a single column of slots and values.  
In the 'add a slot' box, type 'baz' and click add
In the text area, type 'baz' and click 'Enter'
There should now be two columns of slots and values.  

Right click on Eet's value, and click 'open link in new tab'.  
The title at the top should say "A table of size 3 by 3"
Along the left side should be a column containing 	
0  a
1  b
2  c

Along the top should be the row:
1  :FRED  2   :WILMA   3   :US

;; problem with 0 vs 1 base

Click the (1,1).  In the textarea, erase the number and type in 1001.
Click the enter button.
The value of (1,1) should change.  

Close this tab.  

Click the value of the Est slot.  
The title at the top should say "A table of size 3 by 5"
Along the left side should be a column saying:
0  a
1  b
2  c

and each value in the table should have a (<number>,<number>) next to it. 

Go back in your browser.  

Click the value of Hht.  
The title at the top should say "A table of 7412 keys by 3 keys"
Along the left should be a column beginning with
1 Npun.Npf0001
2 Npun.Npf0002 

Along the top should be a row saying
 1	 :DIRECTION	   2	 :FROM	   3	 :TO

and each value in the table should have a (<number>) next to it. 
Go back in your browser.  

Click the value of Set.  
The title at the top should say A table of size 5 by 3
Along the left should be a column:
0 
1
2
3
4

Along the top should be a row: 
   1	 a	   2	 b	   3	 c

and each value in the table should have a (<number>,<number>) next to it. 
Go back in your browser.  

Click on the value of Sst.  
The title at the top should say: A table of size 99 by 99
Along the left should be a column of successive integers starting at 0
and each value in the table should have a (<number>,<number>) next to it. 
Go back in your browser.  

Click on the value of Eht. 
The title at the top should say: A table of size 3 by 3 keys 
Along the left should be a column: 
0  a
1  b
2  c

Along the top should be a row:
   1	 :FRED	   2	 :US	   3	 :WILMA
and each value in the table should have a (<number>) next to it. 
Go back in your browser.  

Click on the value of Het.
The title at the top should say 'A table of 3 keys, each with 3 elements'
Along the left should be a column
1  :FRED
2  :US
3  :WILMA

Along the top should be a row
 1	 a	   2	 b	   3	 c
and each value in the table should have a (<number>) next to it. 
Go back in your browser.  

Click on the value of Hst.  
The title at the top should say: A table of 7412 keys, each with 10 elements
Along the left should be a column beginning with 
1 Npun.Npf0001
2 Npun.Npf0002 

and each value in the table should have a (<number>) next to it.  
Go back in your browser.  

Click the value of Sht.  
The title at the top should say: A table of size 7412 by 4 keys
Along the left should be a column of successive integers starting at 0.

Along the bottom should be a row:
   1	 :DIRECTION	   2	 :FROM	   3	 :GENE	   4	 :TO
and each value in the table should have a (<number>) next to it.  

Click on the 'Down' button in the top left.  The leftmost column should still
have integers starting at 0, but the values in parentheses 
should now start at 41.  
;; really?

In the 'row' box, type 100
In the 'col' box, type 1
In the # of rows box, type 10
In the # of cols box, type 1
Click Display.  
You should now see 10 rows with 1 column labeled :Direction

In the 'row' box, type xy
In the col box, type ()
In the # of rows box, type -
In the # of cols box, type nil
Click display...the table should look like when you first opened it...
40 rows, 4 columns, starting at row 1 and column 1, and these values should
appear in the respective boxes at the top.  	
	

Close the editor window.  

Go back to the VPL and bring down an edit-object box and type in npun.  
Execute the box.  

The npun frame will appear in the frame editor.  

Click the the value of the genes slot, which looks
like a list of genes...you should now be in the sequence
editor, looking at npun's genes.  Click on the first one.  

Click the value of the contiguous-sequence slot, Npun.chromosome
Click the value of the Genes-Sorted-By-Position slot, taking
you to the list of genes again.  

Now, click the Parent link at the top left corner.  
You should now be back at the Npun.chromosome frame.

Click the Parent link again, you should now be back at
npun.npf0001 frame.

Click the Parent link again, you should be back at the list of genes.

Click the parent link again, you should be back at npun's frame.


		


